# AAFC Phylogenetic Tree Project Part 2

Welcome to the second phase of our AAFC Phylogenetic Tree Project! This Snakemake workflow is designed to construct a phylogenetic tree using the docker orthogroups created at the end of part 1. Like in part 1, this workflow also relies on Mambaforge. If you haven't installed Mambaforge yet, you can follow the installation instructions found here: [Snakemake Setup Guide](<https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/tutorial/setup.html>)

Once you've successfully installed Mambaforge, proceed to create a new conda environment using the provided ```environment.yaml``` file.

## Creating the Environment

We recommend using Mamba or Micromamba to create a conda environment that houses all the necessary tools for this analysis. Follow these commands to set up the environment and activate it for your analysis:

```bash
micromamba create -n AAFC_snakemake_env --file environment.yaml
micromamba activate AAFC_snakemake_env
```

## Creating the Configuration File

To guide the workflow to your orthologous gene locations, you'll need to create a configuration file and modify the Python script in ```scripts/configmaker.py``` as shown below:

```python
# Write the formatted output to the new file, changing 'Single_Copy_Orthologue_Sequences/' to match your sequence directory.
output_f.write(f'    {id_without_extension}: Single_Copy_Orthologue_Sequences/{line}')
```

If you used the docker version of OrthoFinder, you will likely find this folder at ```WorkingDirectory/Single_Copy_Orthologue_Sequences/```. After modifying the python script, you can run it to generate the ```config.yaml``` file:

```python
python3 configmaker.py
```

## Running the pipeline

This pipeline enables the creation of a Glomeromycota phylogenetic tree from single-copy orthologue sequences generated by OrthoFinder. Here is an overview of the steps involved:

1. Align the single copy orthologue sequences using MAFFT.
2. Concatanate the alignments and convert them into a .phy file.
3. Trim the alignments using TrimAL.
4. Determine the best substitution model and construct the phylogenetic tree with IQtree.

After creating the conda environment using the ```environment.yaml``` file and generating the ```config.yaml``` file by customizing and running the ```scripts/configmaker.py``` script, the actual Snakemake pipeline can be run.

### Workflow

- First, run the workflow in dry mode:

```bash
snakemake -np > dry_run.out
```

- Then, create a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) visualization and review it:

```bash
snakemake --dag | dot -Tsvg > dag.svg
```

- If dry run completes without a problem and everything looks as expected in the DAG, you can proceed to run the pipeline:

```bash
snakemake --cores
```

## Next steps

Once your ```all_amf.iqtree``` file is generated, you can analyze it to identify the best substitution model for your proteins. For easier phylogenetic tree analysis, it is recommended to open ```all_amf.treefile``` with FigTree and make the necessary modifications using that tool.

## Citations

This part will be updated soon!